                            +-------------+
                            | Qi's README |
                            +-------------+


  1. Introduction
  2. Installation
  3. Contact


  1. Introduction.

Qi is a source builder and a package manager:

   It contains a set of tools where the main command is `qi', a wrapping
guide for the rest of the commands.  It follows the philosophy of the
simplicity but without adding too many features, such as those that can
be found in popular package managers.  Basically it does two things:
builds packages and manages them.

   The building part can get or retrieve source code from remote sites
without the intervention of the developer or package maintainer.  It
downloads the source, reads the checksum, and annotates the same one in
the recipe.  This is done by the `build' command, checking the
integrity of the source and creating the checksum or updating it
without losing focus.

   Qi constructs the sources using recipe names, files that contain
specific instructions to build every source.  As result, a binary
package is obtained which can be installed, removed, upgraded, or
inspected in the system.  The software packages produced by Qi have the
.tlz extension - using tar(1) for packaging, and lzip(1) as the only
compression format in the package redistribution.

   The packages are managed thanks to an external tool called graft(1),
which provides a mechanism for managing multiple packages under a
single directory hierarchy, it was inspired by both Depot (Carnegie
Mellon University) and Stow (Bob Glickstein).  In this aspect, Qi acts
as a complement of Graft: it can decompress packages, check them, solve
conflicts or offer a suitable menu for uninstall them.

  2. Installation.

To make Qi, simple type:

  $ make

To install (and copy) the files on /usr/local:

  $ make install

To install in a different location other than the default, type:

  $ make prefix=$HOME/qi install

To install in a temporary location, you can use DESTDIR=.  This
is useful for package distributors:

  $ make DESTDIR=/tmp/qi install

  3. Contact.

  The Qi home page can be found at `http://www.dragora.org'.
Send bug reports or suggestions to <dragora-bug@nongnu.org>.

